Database vs. spreadsheet: which is better?
Databases and spreadsheets are often referred to interchangeably—but they’re far from the same. Picking the right one for your needs requires some context on how (and why) they differ.
Databases and spreadsheets are fundamentally different tools. But too often, they’re thought of as one and the same.

Learning the nuances of both databases and spreadsheets is the key to unlocking their respective superpowers. And that starts with understanding their differences.

Spreadsheets, on one hand, are a tool most of us are familiar with—and for good reason. They are, after all, wonderful, accessible, and ubiquitous tools. So when it comes time to crunch numbers, balance a budget, or even organize information, reaching for them is second nature.

But useful as they are, spreadsheets aren’t the best tool for every use case. Limitations like duplicate data and one-size-fits all views make them tough to use for more complex use cases. Consider uses cases like content calendars, inventory management systems, and the like. When you’re tackling those uses, a database offers significantly more flexibility and power.

Today, with the right tools, anyone who can use a spreadsheet can use a database. Understanding the differences will empower you to make the right choice for your unique use case.

What, exactly, is a database?
The first step in understanding databases is simple: defining what they are. This piece sums it up best:

A database is a logically organized collection of information, designed in such a way that the information within can be accessed for later use by a computer program.

Put another way: a database is way to track and organize information in a highly flexible structure. That structure allows you to do more with your data.

A database can be displayed in a tabular structure similar to a spreadsheet. But it can also contain relational data: data that can be connected across more than one table. (Note that there are non-relational databases in the world, too, but we can ignore that fact for now.)

This relationship allows tables to be linked in logical ways, enabling a more flexible, productive use of data. So while a database and a spreadsheet might look similar at a glance, their looks can be deceiving. Behind the curtain, databases contain robust functionality and versatility, enabling more sophisticated use cases and, ironically, simplifying work.

The pros and cons of working with databases
Whether you realize it or not, you’re probably already familiar with a database or two. After all, most business applications rely on databases to function behind the scenes.

Your customer relationship management instance (CRM), for example, is a database. Lyft relies on a database to dispatch cars with real-time geotracking. The websites you access every day—like Amazon, Wikipedia, and Netflix—are powered by databases. And that’s just the tip of the iceberg.

Traditionally, databases were designed by engineers using technology like Oracle or MySQL. Older databases typically ran on local servers, accessible only via company networks. But today, cloud-based databases—like Airtable, for example—make that tech available to anyone.

Offering engineering tools like APIs, databases are still viable, robust tools for developers. They can act as a base to build websites, or even power minimum viable products (MVPs). But this new school of databases is also accessible for day-to-day users.

How do spreadsheets differ from databases?
Most of us have worked in a spreadsheet. But not all of us know exactly what they’re designed to do.

A spreadsheet is a digital ledger that stores data in cells displayed in rows and columns—what’s known as tabular format. If the “data” in question is numeric, spreadsheets let you apply formulas to the cells to perform preset functions, like addition or multiplication.

At its core, a spreadsheet is a two-dimensional document designed for data storage and calculation. They’re a powerful tool for tasks like crunching numbers, storing lists, and budget tracking.

Spreadsheets have been a staple for decades, but now, they’re used for all sorts of activities beyond the number-centric use cases they were designed for. From content calendars, to project trackers, inventory management, UX research, and more, crafty spreadsheet users have found ways to hack around their intended limitations. But ingenious as they are, those workarounds come at a cost.

The pros and cons of working with spreadsheets
Spreadsheets are easy to create and understand. They’re essentially data trackers that allow a reasonable degree of content variation. You can insert links, for instance, or format the font within cells. Spreadsheets display everything at once, so when you open a spreadsheet, you can see all the data you have at a glance—or a scroll.

But the very quality that makes them useful—that ability to display all data at once—can be a drawback when dealing with large volumes of data.

Take, for example, a project tracker for a quarter-long marketing campaign. If your campaign contributions are limited to a handful of line items, it’d probably be distracting to see the entire team’s task list every time you open the tracker to update it. A project manager, on the other hand, might want to see all tasks at once from time to time—but with a spreadsheet, both parties are limited to a single shared view.

While spreadsheets typically allow you to “hide” columns to get information out of the way, it’s a manual task—and a temporary fix. As you add more and more information, eventually, the sheet balloons.

At some point, it stops being scalable. While spreadsheets allow for some filtering and querying, those features are rarely enough to keep complex information organized and accessible.

That’s complicated further by their simplified format, which limits the way you can represent and connect your data. Spreadsheets don’t easily accommodate rich data types (like attachments), data validation, or meaningful relationships between data points. And if you’re applying complex or interconnected formulas, one false move can send a destructive domino effect rippling through your sheet.

At their core, they limit you to a two-dimensional, and sometimes precarious representation of the information you care about.

The critical differences between databases and spreadsheets
If you just need to track numbers or keep a list that you occasionally share with others, a spreadsheet is a solid choice.

In situations where you’re dealing with more complex data, or need to use one source of data for multiple purposes, a database often works best.

The main technical difference between a spreadsheet and a database comes down to the way they store data. In a spreadsheet, data is stored in a cell, and can be formatted, edited, and manipulated within that cell.

In a database, cells contain records that come from external tables. This differentiation means that spreadsheets are static documents, while databases can be relational. That means if you upload, edit, or delete a piece of data in one place, the change will be made in every other place that references that data.

For instance, if a customer email address changes in your CRM, instead of notifying sales, marketing, fulfillment, and any other part of your organization that needs to know, you simply make a change in one single place, and that change automatically propagates everywhere.

Not sure which sounds best for you? Here are five core questions to ask as you choose between a spreadsheet or a database:

1. What kind of data do you have?
Most spreadsheets allow text and numeric data, but not necessarily other types of content such as images, videos, and documents. Databases, on the other hand, accommodate a wide range of file types and larger files sizes.

2. How do you want to use that data?
If you want to track a limited volume of data and apply formulas, a spreadsheet is likely your best bet. But if you’re looking to isolate certain subsets of data at a time, or arrange data into multiple views, a database is more effective.

3. How important is your data integrity?
A spreadsheet will, by default, allow you to type anything into a field—and even store different types of data in the same field. This allows for a lot of flexibility, but can also create problems when you (or a teammate) makes a mistake.

Databases offer built-in data validation. If you try to input something in the wrong format, you’ll get an error. This keeps the integrity of your data intact, preventing data cleanliness issues down the line.

4. Do you need deep search capabilities?
Spreadsheets have limited filtering and searching capability—so if that’s compatible with your use case, it could be the right choice. If you need to retrieve records quickly using a certain set of parameters, a database might be a better choice.

5. How many people need access?
It’s easy to share a spreadsheet. You can send a link, cloud share, or even print it out. But sharing is very different from collaborating. Spreadsheets aren’t great for the latter.

Databases are designed for collaboration between multiple users. Say, for example your organization uses one central pool of data for multiple end-uses. Databases let you update information in one place without having to update the data in all the downstream locations it’s tied to. They serve as a single source of truth. That’s helpful for uses like a campaign management document, where updating one datapoint (like a change in launch date, for example) can automatically update all of the other records it’s related to.

Evaluating the differences between the two
Databases are more complex and versatile tools. And because of that, there’s an assumption that they require special expertise to build and manage. After all, they’ve historically been the domain of engineers.

Yet these assumptions are no longer true. With tools like Airtable, virtually anyone can create, manage, and share a database—no technical knowledge required.
Example:
If you have an email list that is a mile long, it can be hard to manage all your contacts.

This is especially a problem when you want to prevent emailing the same contact twice or sending the wrong email to the wrong contact. A very simple way to avoid these issues is to use an effective database management system (DBMS) in the form of an email client.

Database management system is important in email marketing.
There are many advantages of database management system that you can make use of in your email marketing strategy. In this post, we aim to list down all those advantages so that you can make the best use of them.

Let’s get started.

1. A Database Management System Helps Decrease Redundancy
When you have a huge email list, it can be annoying to find the same email address listed multiple times. This could be because of multiple lead magnets or signup forms or subscription forms on your website that the same subscriber has signed up to.

Redundant data in your email list takes up space, and ultimately costs you money. You will also have the problem of sending the same email multiple times to the same subscriber.

When you use a good database management system, all your data is integrated in one place. That means there is less chance for duplicate data since all the duplicate values can be removed easily.

2. DBMS Allows You To Easily Share Data
Another great advantage of using a database management system is that you can share all the data on the system between authorised users.

Sharing data on a database management system.
This eliminates the need to constantly transfer or share data to another team member or user. It helps improve workflow and allows all users to see data on their own systems at any point of time.

3. Database Management Allows Consistency
Having all your information in one place allows you to refer to previous data while creating new data. This means you can have consistency in your emails and other marketing material.

Updating information in the system becomes easy since all the data is stored in one place. This provides the users with a seamless experience and avoids confusions and irregularities. Having a database thus maintains the integrity of all your data.

Consistency and integrity of data is key in measuring the success rate of your email campaigns and figuring out how you can improve it.

4. A Database Management System Allows Easy Searchability
When you have a database for all your email list data, it becomes easy to search for information such as a particular email address, a group of email addresses, a previously sent email, etc.

Since all your data is in one place, a user can get quick results and can easily compare one or two data sets of the same form.

DMBS allows easy search and retrieval of important data.
You can also calculate different metrics such as open rates, click rates, and bounce rates, so that you can continuously improve your email campaigns.

A database management system allows for easy search and retrieval of important data.

5. DBMS Keeps Your Data Secure
When you are managing large volumes of highly sensitive data, it is important to prioritise the safety and security of your data.

A database management system allows you to protect all your data from unauthorised users with restricted login. This is done by protecting login access using a password.

A database also keeps your data secure and backs up all your data so that you can be safe even in the event of data being lost due to some reason. It keeps your data safe from hackers and even offers some protection against spambots.

6. Database Management Offers Privacy For All Your Data Files
Your data is highly confidential and must be kept private. The people who sign up to your website are trusting you to keep their email addresses safe.

It would be damaging for your business if your email list got into the wrong hands. This could lead to spam and unsolicited emails to your email subscribers without your knowledge.

Having a database management system ensures that all your data is kept private at all times. This will not only keep your subscribers safe from spam bots and phishing attempts, but will also protect your business.

7. A Database Keeps Your Data Clean And Organised
Having a database management system allows you to systematically organise your data so that it is easily understandable and easily accessible to all its users. It keeps all the information in a simple and clear manner, making it very easy to handle by those who need to use that data for various purposes.

Orgainse your data with DBMS.
Any operation or task is easily implemented and the whole process of email marketing is thus simplified. A database system thus saves you loads of time, energy, and resources that you can devote to other things in your business.

8. A DBMS Gives You Automatic Backup And Data Recovery
It can be very time consuming for you to manually backup all your data at regular intervals. If you have a very large volume of important data, this task becomes extremely tedious.

On the other hand, if you miss backing up your information on time and end up losing your data, it can cost your company a lot of business.

A database management system eliminates this issue by consistently and regularly backing up all your data so that you don’t need to worry too much about it.

Automatic data backup and recovery can lighten your load and save you a lot of money.

For example, if your system fails for some reason during a task, the database management system automatically saves all the data so that you don’t need to start from scratch.

In a traditional file processing system, you would have to remember to backup your data yourself, which not only takes away a lot of your time and resources, but also is risky in case you fail to backup your data on time for some reason.

9. Database Management Ensures Integrity of Data
Since there are many people entering their information in your database, there should be a way to weed out all the invalid data such as invalid email addresses, spam, and errors.

Having a database management system will allow you to put data integrity constraints on your data fields do that only the right kind of data can be entered into the system.

DBMS also checks for the integrity and validity of data.
For instance, the email address field in your subscription form should only be able to take up valid email addresses. This is especially important when you are paying for each email address to be on your list, so you cannot afford to have a ton of invalid email addresses or other spammy or inaccurate data in your database.

We can’t stress enough, a clean email lists is crucial in emails deliverability. Having a database management system taking care of your email contacts reduces duplicate and invalid data.

10. A Database Management System Allows Easy Reorganisation of Data
There will be many instances where you will have to reorganise your data into new categories or lists. Having a database makes that process very simple as you don't have to go back and re-enter all that data manually.

It is very simple to re-divide your email list into new categories or new groups. The database management system allows you to easily do that without having to recreate the same data over and over again.

11. Data Migration is Easy in a Database Management System

If you need to move to a different email service for some reason, data migration could be an issue.

A database management system allows you to quickly transfer all your files into the new email service provider without any discrepancies or loss of data. This is very essential when you are dealing with large volumes of data like email addresses or past emails - that is not easily replaceable.

12. Database Management Allows Use Without Expertise
When you use a database management system, you do not need to have special training or expertise. For instance, you do not need to learn coding or other technical skills in order to retrieve and use data from a database.

Email marketing database systems are user friendly and easily accessible.
Any kind of functionality you require is easy to figure out, making an email marketing database system user friendly and easily accessible. You do not need to be an expert in using it, and you will become better at using the system as time goes by.

13. Maintaining a DBMS is Less Expensive
Although you will have to shell out a fair amount for your database management system, it will prove to be very cost effective in the long run.

This is because maintaining a database is quite economical and can help your business in a huge way.

There are many advantages of a database management system for your company’s email marketing needs. A database helps you hold all your data safely in one place and creates backups for you in times of any emergency.

Having a database management system allows you to take better control of your email list and keep all your hard earned data safe and secure at all times.
